# Day 5

## Objective
- Functions

## Resources
- Functions: https://www.w3schools.com/js/js_functions.asp

## Table of Contents
1. **Functions**
  * Creating and executing functions
  * Parameters and arguments  
  * Local variables
  * Return
2. **Project**
  * [Cookie Clicker](https://github.com/ICSpark/intro-to-web-dev/blob/master/05%20-%20Functions/cookie-clicker.md)

## Functions

### Creating and executing functions
A JavaScript function is a block of code designed to perform a specific task. A function is executed when we invoke (or call) it.
  * We create a function by first using the keyword **function**, followed by the name of the function, parenthesis, and curly braces. The code within the curly braces is what will be executed when we run the function.
  * We run the function by calling the function by its name, followed by parenthesis.

``` JavaScript
// Create a function
function greet() {
  console.log("Hello");
}

// Run the function
greet();
```

The console will print "Hello".

### Parameters and arguments  
We can add parameters within the parenthesis of a function. These parameters act like local variables that will store the value (the argument) received when we run the function. This is useful as we can reuse code with different arguments to get different results.

``` JavaScript
// Create the function
function add(a,b) {
  console.log(a+b);
}

//Run the function
add(3,5)
```

In the code above, the function is created with the parameters ```a``` and ```b```. When we run the function, we input the arguments 3 and 5. ```a``` becomes 3 and ```b``` becomes 5. When we run the function, the console should print 8.

### Local variables
Variables defined within a function become **local** to that function. Local variables can only be accessed within the function.

``` JavaScript
// Create a function
function greet(name) {
  var greeting = "Bonjour ";
  console.log(greeting + name);
}

console.log(greeting);
```

The console will print a reference error. Since variables defined within a function can only be accessed within the function, there is no such variable called greeting outside of the curly braces of the greet function.

### Return
When JavaScript reaches a return statement, the function will stop executing. Functions often compute a **return value**. The return value is "returned" back to the caller.

``` JavaScript
//Create a function
function multiply(a,b) {
  return a*b;
}

multiply(3,5);
```

In this example, our function will return the number 15. We do not see this in the console because we did not ```console.log()``` anything! Even though we don't see it, the function does allow us to compute a*b (or 3*5 in this case). How do we see this in the console? We can run the function and treat that as a value. 

``` JavaScript
//Create a function
function multiply(a,b) {
  return a*b;
}

console.log(multiply(3,5));
```

## Projects
1. [Cookie clicker](https://github.com/ICSpark/intro-to-web-dev/blob/master/05%20-%20Functions/cookie-clicker.md)
