# Day 4

## Objective
- Variables, operators, if statements

## Resources
- Variables: https://www.w3schools.com/js/js_variables.asp
- Operators: https://www.w3schools.com/js/js_operators.asp
- If Statements: https://www.w3schools.com/js/js_if_else.asp

## Table of Contents
1. **Background**
  * What is JavaScript?
2. **Variables**
  * What is a variable?
  * Declaring and assigning variables
  * What kind of data can variables hold?
  * Console.log
3. **Operators**
  * The assignment and number operator
  * String operators
  * Comparison operators
4. **If Statements**
  * If statement
  * Else statement
5. **Project**
  * [Iffy](https://github.com/junior-devleague/iffy)

## Background

### What is JavaScript?
JavaScript, or JS, is a programming language created by Brendan Eich in 1995. JS allows you to add dynamic behavior to web pages e.g. run code in response to certain events occurring on a web page (click, mouseover, and more!).

JavaScript is not the same as another programming language called Java. JavaScript and Java are like Carpet and Car - similar names but very different!

## Variables

### What is a variable?
Variables are like containers that can store information. In math, you usually use a variable like ```x``` to store a certain number. In JavaScript, we can create variables to store numbers, text, and more.

### Declaring and assigning variables
We create (also called "declare") a variable by using the keyword ```var```:

``` Javascript
var x;
```

In the example above, we created a variable called ```name```. Variables must be identified with unique names. General rules for naming can be found [here](https://www.w3schools.com/js/js_variables.asp).

After we declare our variable, the variable has the value of ```undefined```. To assign a value to the variable, we use the equal sign as follows:

``` javascript
x = 53;
```

We can also assign a value to the variable when we declare it:

``` javascript
var age = 12;
```

### What kind of data can variables hold?
JavaScript variables can hold many data types. See the examples below with the type of data being stored in the comments. This week, we will focus on numbers, strings, and booleans.

``` javascript
var age = 12; // Number
var name = "John Doe"; // String
var start = true; // Boolean
var person = { // Object
  name: "Jane Doe",
  age: 13,
  hairColor: "brown"
};
var classroom = ["Jane", "Joe", "Anna", "Daniel"]; // Array
```

Numbers can be typed like regular numbers, with or without decimals. Strings are like text, but must be within quotation marks to be distinguished from variable names. Booleans represent one of two values: true or false.

### Using console.log()

The console.log() is a function in JavaScript which we can use to display any variable or message to the user. The console.log comes in handy when we are testing our JavaScript code. Use the console.log() function by placing what you want displayed in the console in between the parenthesis like so:

``` javascript
var name = "Daniel";
console.log(name) //Look in your console! The console should display the text "Daniel".

var age = 22;
console.log(age) // Look in your console! The console should display the number 22.
```

After creating your HTML, CSS, and JS files in Atom, drag the index.html tab to the Google Chrome search bar and press enter. Right click on your web page and select "Inspect" to access the developer tools. Click on the ```Console``` tab to view the console.

## Operators
An operator is a character that represents an action. Similar to math, we can use ```+``` to add, ```-``` to subtract, ```/``` to divide, and ```*``` to multiply.

### The assignment and number operators
The assignment operator ```=``` assigns a value to a variable like how we have seen previously.

``` javascript
var greeting = "Hello";
```

In the above example, we use ```=``` to assign "Hello" to the variable ```greeting```. Some common operators we can use for numbers are described below:
  * Addition (```+```)
  * Subtraction (```-```)
  * Multiplication (```*```)
  * Division (```/```)

### String operators
We can use the ```+``` operator to add (concatenate) strings like so:

``` JavaScript
var firstName = "Jane";
var lastName = "Doe";
var fullName = firstName + " " + lastName;
console.log(fullName); //The console will display "Jane Doe"!
```

### Comparison operators
Comparison operators are used in logical statements. We can use comparison operators to determine if a value is equal to, not equal to, greater than / less than another value. This is useful for when we use conditional statements (if statements) to compare values, then take action on the result.

Comparison operators:
  * Equal to ```==```
  * Equal value and equal type ```===```
  * Not equal ```!=```
  * Not equal value or not equal type ```!==```
  * Greater than ```>```
  * Less than ```<```
  * Greater than or equal to ```>=```
  * Less than or equal to ```<=```

## If Statements
We can use comparison operators to perform different actions based on the result of the comparison using an if statement.

An if statement specifies a block of JavaScript to be executed if a condition is true. We use the keyword ```if``` to start the if statement. This is followed by parenthesis that contain a conditional statement, and curly braces that indicate the block of code to be executed if the statement is true:

``` javascript
var x = 5;

if (x < 10) {
  console.log("You are right!");
}
```

Since x = 5 and 5 is less than 10, the statement is indeed true and the console will display "You are right!". What if the statement is false? We can use an ```else``` statement to specify a block of code to be executed if the condition is false:

``` javascript
var x = 13;

if (x < 10) {
  console.log("You are right!");
} else {
  console.log("You are wrong...");
}
```

Since x = 13 and 13 is greater than 10, the statement is false! So we execute the block of code within the ```else``` statement and the console will display "You are wrong...".

There are more things we can do with if statements. Learn more [here](https://www.w3schools.com/js/js_if_else.asp).

## Project
1. [Iffy](https://github.com/junior-devleague/iffy)
