# Day 6

## Objective
- Arrays and objects

## Resources
- HTML, CSS, JS reference: https://www.w3schools.com/

## Table of Contents
1. **Arrays**
  * Creating arrays
  * Accessing elements in arrays
  * Array methods
2. **Objects**
  * Creating objects
  * Accessing values using dot notation
3. **Project**
  * [Lunchtime](https://github.com/junior-devleague/lunchtime)

## Arrays
JavaScript arrays are data structures that allow us to store multiple values in a single variable and associate each value with a position.

### Creating an array
We create an array by using square brackets ```[]```. In these square brackets, type in each piece of data that you want to store in the array. Each item should be followed by a comma (except for the last item), like the examples below. Practice typing these in your own text editor.

``` javascript
var favoriteFoods = ["food1", "food2", "food3"];

var favoriteNumbers = [3, 23, 44, 22, 13, 24, 66];

var favoriteColors = ["color1", "color2", "color3"];

var hobbies = ["hobby1", "hobby2", "hobby3", "hobby4"];
```

### Access elements in an array
You can access elements in an array by referring to its index number. The first element in an array (the one at the far left) has an index number of 0. The next element has an index number of 1, the next element after that has an index number of 2...etc.

``` javascript
var food = ["pizza", "noodles", "soup"];

console.log(food[0]); // Prints "pizza"
console.log(food[1]); // Prints "noodles"
console.log(food[2]); // Prints "soup"
```

The string "pizza" has the index number 0. The string "noodles" has the index number 1. The string "soup" has the index number 2. If we add more items to the array, each additional item would have an index number that increases in this pattern. Just remember that the first item in an array (the item at the far left) starts at index 0!

### Changing array elements
We can change an array element by using ```=``` like so.

``` javascript
var food = ["pizza", "noodles", "soup"];

food[0] = "hamburgers";

console.log(food) // Prints ["hamburgers", "noodles", "soup"];
```

In the example above, we set the first item in the food array to "hamburgers". We can access the full array by referring to the name of the variable storing it. When we console.log the food array, it should print our newly updated food array with "hamburgers" as the first item.

### Array methods
There are numerous built-in array properties and methods that we can use. See the list here with examples: https://www.w3schools.com/js/js_array_methods.asp. Test out the code below to see a few of these properties and methods at work!

``` javascript
var colors = ["red", "blue", "yellow"];

// The length property returns the length of the array (number of array elements)
console.log(colors.length); // Prints 3

// The pop() method removes the last element from an array and returns the value that was popped out
colors.pop();
console.log(colors); // Prints ["red", "blue"];

// The push() method adds a new element to the end of an array and returns the new array length
colors.push("brown");
console.log(colors); // Prints ["red", "blue", "brown"];
```

## Objects
JavaScript objects are data structures that also allow us to store multiple values in a single variable. These values are written as name:value pairs. We can think about them as a variable storing a collection of variables.

### Creating an object
Create an object by using curly braces ```{}```. In these curly braces, type out the name:value pairs like so:

``` javascript
var person = {
  firstName: "John",
  lastName: "Doe",
  age: 12,
  likesPizza: true,
  greet: function() {
    console.log("Hi!");
  }
}
```

Notice that the name:value pairs are separated by commas, except for the very last name:value pair. As objects are like collections of variables, we can also store functions as a value in a pair. Functions associated with objects are called **methods**.

### Accessing values using dot notation
You can access object properties and methods like so:

``` javascript
var person = {
  firstName: "John",
  lastName: "Doe",
  age: 12,
  likesPizza: true,
  greet: function() {
    console.log("Hi!");
  }
}

console.log(person.firstName); //Prints "John"

person.greet(); // Runs the greet method
```

## Project
1. [Lunchtime](https://github.com/junior-devleague/lunchtime)
